.TH "el_option" "3" "10 June 2019 (v9999)" "bofc.pl"
.SH NAME
.PP
.B el_option
- sets optional configuration of the logger
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
.B #include <embedlog.h>
.PP
.BI "int el_option(enum el_option " option ", " ... ")"
.br
.B const struct el *el_get_el(void)
.br
.BI "int el_ooption(struct el *" el ", \
enum el_option " option ", " ... ")"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.BR el_option (3)
allows user to configure logger's internal el object, to tune logging to users
needs.
.PP
.BR el_get_el (3)
allows user to get pointer to global embedlog object - that is used by all
embedlog functions that don't accept
.I el
object - to directly read its fields.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
Below is a list of
.I option
that can be configured.
Value inside parenthesis determines argument types of variadic arguments
.I ...
.PP
.BI "EL_LEVEL (" enum " " el_level " level)"
.RB "[default: " EL_INFO "]"
.RS
.   B EL_LEVEL
sets what the current logging level shall be.
Altough it accepts
.   B enum el_level
type, this can be whatever number from range <0, 7>.
The higher the level, the lower priority of the message.
All messages that have lower priority (higher number) then currently set
.   I level
will not be printed.
There are 8 predefined levels, sorted by priority (highest first):
.   PP
.   RS
.       B EL_FATAL,
.       br
.       B EL_ALERT,
.       br
.       B EL_CRIT,
.       br
.       B EL_ERROR,
.       br
.       B EL_WARN,
.       br
.       B EL_NOTICE,
.       br
.       B EL_INFO,
.       br
.       B EL_DBG
.   RE
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
specified
.       I level
is invalid (bigger than EL_DBG).
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_OUT (" enum " " el_output " outputs)"
.RB "[default: " EL_OUT_STDERR "]"
.RS
.   B EL_OUT
simply sets to what
.IR outputs .
logs will be printed to with any of the printing
function.
User can enable as many outputs as he desires - it can be all inputs or even
none (if one wants to surpress logging for some time).
To enable multiple outputs join values with
.   B or
operator (
.   B |
).
.   PP
Currently following
.I outputs
can be enabled.
.   PP
.   B EL_OUT_STDERR
.   RS
Messages will be printed to standard error output
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_OUT_STDOUT
.   RS
Messages will be printed to standard output
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_OUT_SYSLOG
.   RS
Messages will be sent to syslog facility. This requires system with implemented
POSIX.1-2001 and any syslog daemon
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_OUT_FILE
.   RS
Messages will be printed to file.
To work user should set output file with
.       BR EL_FPATH .
Log rotation can be configured with
.       B EL_FROTATE_NUMBER
and
.       B EL_FROTATE_SIZE
options.
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_OUT_NET
.   RS
Messages shall be printed to external server.
This requires BSD Sockets to be enabled on the clients system, and listening
server.
(TODO Not implemented yet)
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_OUT_TTY
.   RS
Prints messages directly to configured serial console.
Apart from setting this, user should also configure device and speed with
.   BR EL_TTY_DEV .
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_OUT_ALL
.   RS
Enables all supported outputs at once
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_OUT_NONE
.   RS
Disables every output - logs won't be printed at all
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_OUT_CUSTOM
.   RS
Enables custom function to be called on log print.
Pointer to custom function needs to be set with
.       B EL_CUSTOM_PUTS
option.
.   RE
.   PP
Many of the outputs can be configured for special needs, and some of them need
mandatory configuration.
For information about output configuration see proper option description
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Specified
.           I output
is invalid
.       RE
.   RE
.   PP
.   RS
.       B ENODEV
.       RS
Specified
.I          output
is not implemented on current system (support was not compiled into library)
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_PRINT_NL (" int " nl)"
.RB "[default: " 1 "]"
.RS
When enables, new line marker will be added to each print.
If you disable it, you will be able to create very long lines
with consecutive print calls.
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_PREFIX (" const " " char " " * "prefix)"
.RB "[default: " unset " (won't be printed)]"
.RS
You can configure logger to add
.   I prefix
to every message you print.
.   I prefix
will be printed between log level info "i/" and you message.
No spaces are added.
If you set your
.   I prefix
to simple
.   BR PREFIX ,
printed message will be
.   BR "i/PREFIXmy log message" ,
so you might want to add space there.
If
.   I prefix
is bigger than
.   B EL_PREFIX_LEN
prefix will be truncated.
To disable prefixing, simply set
.   I prefix
to
.   BR NULL .
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_COLORS (" int " colors)"
.RB "[default: " 0 "]"
.RS
If this is set to 1, output will be enriched with ANSI colors depending on the
message severity.
This option needs terminal supporting colors.
You can store messages with colors to file, and then read them with colors on
color-enabled terminal.
If this is set to 0, no colors will be added.
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Input argument is different than 1 or 0
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_TS (" enum " " el_option_timestamp " timestamp)"
.RB "[default: " EL_TS_OFF "]"
.RS
Allows timestamp to be added to each log message. Possible values for
.I timestamp
are:
.   PP
.   B EL_TS_OFF
.   RS
Timestamp will not be added to messages
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_TS_SHORT
.   RS
Short timestamp will be added to log in format
.       B [1503661223.537631]
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_TS_LONG
.   RS
Long timestamp will be added to log in format
.       B [2017-08-25 11:40:23.537651]
.   RE
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Input argument is invalid
.       RE
.       PP
.       B ENOSYS
.       RS
Timestamp support was not compiled in and setting this option is disabled.
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_TS_TM (" enum " " el_option_timestamp_timer " timer)"
.RB "[default: " EL_TS_TM_TIME "]"
.RS
Sets the timer source for the timestamp print.
.   PP
.   B EL_TS_TM_CLOCK
.   RS
Library will use value from
.       BR clock ()
function.
With this clock precission varies from 10^-3[s] to 10^-9[s].
On POSIX systems, this clock has precision of 10^-6[s].
This timer has a lot drawbacks, time value is unspecified at the beggining of
the program, timer is not incremented when thread is sleeping, timer will
overlap eventually (on 32bit systems with POSIX it takes around 72 minutes for
the clock to overlap).
On the other hand this is the most precise clock for pure c89 systems without
POSIX.
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_TS_TM_TIME
.   RS
Time is taken from
.       BR time ()
function.
This returns current wall clock of the system, it's precision is very low
(1[s]), but it's pure c89 and it is good for logging low frequent messages.
This clock is susceptible to unexpected time change (from NTP or by root
itself).
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_TS_TM_REALTIME
.   RS
Time is taken from
.       BR clock_gettime ()
using
.       B CLOCK_REALTIME
clock.
This required system with POSIX.1-2001.
This time returns current system wall clock, but it's precision is much higher
than
.       B EL_TS_TM_TIME
clock (depending on system it can vary from 10^-3[s] up to even 10^-9[s]).
Just like it is with
.       B EL_TS_TM_TIME
this timestamp can jump forward of backward if it is changed in the system.
.   RE
.   PP
.   B EL_TS_TM_MONOTONIC
.   RS
This clock is similar to
.       B EL_TS_TM_REALTIME
but it shows time from unspecified time and is not affected by time change
(it can still be altered with
.       BR adjtime ()
or NTP)
.   RE
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Input argument is invalid
.       RE
.       PP
.       B ENODEV
.       RS
Specified timer source was not compiled in and is not available
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_TS_FRACT (" enum " " el_option_timestamp_fraction " fraction)
.RB "[default: " EL_TS_FRACT_OFF "]"
.RS
This option controls how to display fractions of seconds.
If high resolution is not needed or not supported, it's best to set this to
lowest resolution possible.
Table will show exacly what this is about.
Example uses long timestamp, interesting part is after date after dot '.'.
.PP
.nf
    +-----------------+-------------------------------+
    |      value      |  resulting timestamp string   |
    +-----------------+-------------------------------+
    | EL_TS_FRACT_OFF | 2018-04-17 22:02:57           |
    | EL_TS_FRACT_MS  | 2018-04-17 22:02:57.070       |
    | EL_TS_FRACT_US  | 2018-04-17 22:02:57.070518    |
    | EL_TS_FRACT_NS  | 2018-04-17 22:02:57.070518782 |
    +-----------------+-------------------------------+
.fi
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_PRINT_LEVEL (" int " print)"
.RB "[default: " 1 "]"
.RS
If this is set to 1, each log will have log level information prefix in format
"l/" where 'l' is first character of level message is printed with, for example:
.   PP
.   RS
c/this is critical message
.       br
n/this is just a notice
.       br
d/debug print
.   RE
.PP
If value is set to 0, level information will not be added, and above messages
would like like this
.PP
.   RS
this is critical message
.       br
this is just an notice
.       br
debug print
.   RE
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Input argument is different than 1 or 0
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_FINFO (" int " finfo)"
.RB "[default: " 0 "]"
.RS
If set to 1, adds information about log location to each message in format
[some_file.c:123]. Setting this to 0, will result in no file information at all
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Input argument is different than 1 or 0
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_FUNCINFO (" int " funcinfo)"
.RB "[default: " 0 "]"
.RS
If set to 1, adds information about function from which message has been
printed in format [funcname()] or if
.   B EL_FINFO
is enabled [some_file.c:123:funcname()].
Setting this to 0 will result in no function information.
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Input argument is different than 1 or 0
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.B EL_CUSTOM_PUT (
.IB "int (*" el_custom_put ")(const char *s, size_t slen, void *user)" ,
.IB void\  *user
.B )
.RB "[default: " unset "]"
.RS
Sets function pointer for custom message print.
Function will receive complete messsage (after processsing) to print, just as it
would be printed to ie. stderr or another facility. Both binary and string data
can be received this way.
.   PP
.   I s
points to a data buffer, it can be null terminated string, or arbitrary binary
data - depending on which functions has been called.
.   PP
.   I slen
contains size of
.   I s
buffer.
If
.   I s
is null terminated string, then
.   I slen
contains length of string including null terminator character.
For binary data, it contains size of binary buffer.
.   PP
.   I user
pointer can be used to pass own logger object where data shall be sent.
For example it may contain pointer to
.   B el
struct, if you don't use global el struct.
.   PP
Function cannot fail. If NULL is passed, custom function won't be called.
It is still mandatory to enable custom printing with
.   BR el_option (3)\ -\  EL_OUT .
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_FPATH (" const " " char " " * "path)"
.RB "[default: " unset "]"
.RS
Sets the
.I path
for the logs. Logs will be stored in this file. If file
rotation is enabled, a numer will be postfixed to each file. See
.   B EL_FROTATE_NUMBER
in this page for more details.
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Input parameter is NULL
.       RE
.       PP
.       B ENAMETOOLONG
.       RS
File name is too long
.       RE
.       PP
Function can also fail and set
.       I errno
for any of the errors specified for the routing
.       BR fopen ()
.   RE
.PP
If function fails with
.B EINVAL
or
.BR ENAMETOOLONG ,
file is not opened and any calls that logs to file will
result in failure.
Any other error is in reality just a warning, meaning file could not have been
opened now, but embedlog will try to reopen in each time it logs to file.
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_FROTATE_NUMBER (" int " number)"
.RB "[default: " 0 "]"
.RS
If set to 0, file rotation will be disabled and logs will be printed into
specified file without size limit.
The only size limit is the one presented by the filesystem and architecture.
.   PP
If this value is bigger than 0, file rotation will be enabled. All files will
have suffixes added to name set in EL_FPATH. For example,
.   IR program.log.0 .
Files are enumareted from
.   I .0
to
.   IR .n ,
where
.   I n
is set rotate number.
File with suffix
.   I .0
is the oldest one, and the higher the number, the newer the file is.
If logger reaches maximum number of files, oldest one with suffix
.   I .0
will be deleted and suffixes of the files will be decremented by 1 (ie.
.   I log.1
will be renamed to
.   IR log.0 ,
.   I log.2
will be renamed to
.   I log.1
and so on).
.   PP
User can also pass 1 here, but if file reaches its size limit, it will be
deleted and printing will continue from the empty file
.   PP
When
.   I number
is bigger than 10, padded zeroes will be added to rotated logs like
.   IR log.02\  ,\  log.004\  or\  log.076 .
Actual number of padded zeroes depends in
.   I number
passed.
For bigger than 10 it will be 1 zero, for bigger than 100 it will be 0
zeroes and so on.
This is done to ease up sorting when one would want to concat all files
with one simple
.   BR cat\ * .
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Input parameter is less than 0 or bigger than
.           BR USHRT_MAX (65535).
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_FROTATE_SYMLINK (" int " enable)"
.RB "[default: " 1 "]"
.RS
When
.   B EL_FROTATE_NUMBER
is bigger than 0, this option is enabled and program runs on UNIX,
.   B embedlog
will create symlink file in the same directory as rest of the logs with base
name of
.   I path
that is passed to
.   BR EL_FPATH .
So if "/var/log/program/program.log" path is passed, after some time more
or less this file structure will be generated
.   PP
.   nf
    /var/log/program/program.log.0
    /var/log/program/program.log.1
    /var/log/program/program.log.2
    /var/log/program/program.log.3
    /var/log/program/program.log -> program.log.3
.   fi
.   PP
Symlink will always point to file directly in the same directory.
Symlink file will always point to most recent log file. This option
is enabled by default.
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Input parameter is not 0 or 1
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_FROTATE_SIZE (" unsigned\ long " size)"
.RB "[default: " 0 "]"
.RS
This defines
.I size
at which files will be rotated.
If message being printed would overflow rotate size, current file will be closed
and new one will be created, and current message will be stored in that new
file.
It is guaranteed that file will not be bigger than value set in this option.
If log printed into file is bigger than configure rotate size, message will be
truncated, to prevent file bigger than configure rotate size.
It's very rare situation as it doesn't make a lot of sense to set rotate size to
such small value.
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Value is less than 1
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_FSYNC_EVERY (" unsigned\ long " size)"
.RB "[default: " 32768 "]"
.RS
Simply writing data to file descriptor is not enough, metadata also has to be
synced or you are facing data loose on unexpected power loose.
Yes, data will be on block device, but entry to it in file system will not be
updated, thus system will think file did not change.
To prevent that one must sync data and metadata periodically.
Data will be synced every
.I size
of bytes written.
It basically translates to 'how much data am I ready to loose?'.
Set this too high and you may loose a significant ammout of data on power lose.
Set this too low and your performance goes out of the window.
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
Value is less than 0
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_FSYNC_LEVEL (" enum " " el_level " level)"
.RB "[default: " EL_FATAL "]"
.RS
If level of printed message is
.   I level
or less (that is higher priority), it will be synced to disk every single time
regardless of
.   B EL_FSYNC_EVERY
option.
Messages with level
.   B EL_FATAL
(that is also default value for level sync) are synced always regardless of any
options set.
Messages printed with functions that don't take log level, will be treated as
messages with
.   B EL_DBG
level.
If
.   I level
is set to
.   B EL_DBG
every message printed with any function will be immediately synced to drive
(careful with that, this will impact performance a great deal if you print a lot
of debug messages).
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
specified
.       I level
is invalid (bigger than EL_DBG).
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_TTY_DEV (" const\ char\ * "dev, " speed_t " speed)"
.RB "[default: " unset "]"
.RS
Tells
.I embedlog
to use
.I dev
serial device configured to
.IR speed .
Serial device will also be configured to transmit in 8 bits of data, without
parity and one stop bit (8N1).
Logger uses only transmit pin (TX) and will translate all
.B LF
into
.BR CR-LF .
If
.I speed
is configured to
.BR B0,
serial port settings will not be altered, library will simply open port and
will happily work on current serial settings.
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
Function can return errors from
.   BR open ,
.   BR tcgetattr ,
.   B cfsetispeed
and
.   BR tcsetattr .
.   RE
.RE
.PP
.BI "EL_THREAD_SAFE (" int " safe)"
.RB "[default: " 0 "]"
.RS
By default,
.   B embedlog
is not thread safe.
While it may be relatively safe to use it in multi-thread environment
when you are logging to
.   B stdio
or
.   BR stderr ,
this surely isn't the case for more complex outputs like printing to file.
Also, without
.   B EL_THREAD_SAFE
calling
.   BR el_pmemory (3)
may result in interlacing prints.
.   PP
So, when using embedlog in multi-threaded environment, it is advised to enable
.   B EL_THREAD_SAFE
by passing 1 as
.   I safe
argument.
.   B embedlog
will then
.   BR pthread_mutex_lock ()
whenever threads access
.   I el
object.
.   PP
.   B EL_THREAD_SAFE
call must be performed when no other threads are accessing
.   I el
object, since at this point it is not possible to lock the mutex.
Common usage is to enable thread safety at the beggining - right after
.   BR el_init (3),
and leave it to be destroyed by
.   BR el_cleanup (3).
.   PP
It is safe to call this option multiple time with same argument.
.B embedlog
will not allow for multiple initialization nor destruction of mutex.
When options is called for the second time with same argument (like 1),
nothing will happen and funciton will return 0.
.   PP
.   B ERRORS
.   RS
Function can return errors from
.       BR pthread_mutex_init (),
and
.       BR pthread_mutex_destroy ().
.       PP
.       B EINVAL
.       RS
.           I safe
is different than 1 or 0
.       RE
.   RE
.RE
.SH RETURN VALUE
.PP
On success 0 is returned. -1 is returned when any error occured.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EINVAL
Passed
.I option
is invalid.
.TP
.B ENOSYS
Passed
.I option
is not supported on this system (support was not compiled)
.PP
Also check for error description of specific option that failed for more
informations
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
.BR el_overview (7),
.BR el_cleanup (3),
.BR el_destroy (3),
.BR el_flush (3),
.BR el_init (3),
.BR el_new (3),
.BR el_ocleanup (3),
.BR el_oflush (3),
.BR el_oinit (3),
.BR el_operror (3),
.BR el_opmemory (3),
.BR el_opmemory_table (3),
.BR el_oprint (3),
.BR el_oputs (3),
.BR el_ovprint (3),
.BR el_perror (3),
.BR el_pmemory (3),
.BR el_pmemory_table (3),
.BR el_print (3),
.BR el_puts (3),
.BR el_vprint (3).
