.TH "el_output_enable" "3" "22 Sep 2017 (v1.0.0)" "bofc.pl"

.SH NAME
\fBel_output_enable\fR, \fBel_output_disable\fR - enable or disable specific
output.

.SH SYNOPSIS

.sh
.BI "#include <embedlog.h>

.sh
.BI "el_output_enable(enum el_output " output ")"
.br
.BI "el_output_disable(enum el_output " output ")"
.br
.BI "el_ooutput_enable(struct el_options *" options ","
.BI "enum el_output " output ")"
.br
.BI "el_ooutput_disable(struct el_options *" options ","
.BI "enum el_output " output ")"

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBel_output_enable\fR will enable given \fIoutput\fR, when log is printed
with any of the printing function. User can enable as many outputs as he
desires - it can be all inputs of even none (if one wants to surpress logging
for some time). Enabling or disabling \fIoutput\fR when it alread has been
enabled/disabled has no effect.

Currently following \fIoutputs\fB can be enabled.

.TP
.B EL_OUT_STDERR
Messages will be printed to standard error output

.TP
.B EL_OUT_SYSLOG
Messages will be sent to syslog facility. This requires system with implementing
POSIX.1-2001 and any syslog daemon

.TP
.B EL_OUT_FILE
Messages will be printed to file
.TP
.B EL_OUT_NET
Messages shall be printed to external server. This requires BSD Sockets to be
enabled on the clients system, and listening server. (TODO Not implemented yet)

.TP
.B EL_OUT_TTY
Prints messages directly to configured serial console

.TP
.B EL_OUT_ALL
Enables all supported outputs at once

.TP
.B EL_OUT_CUSTOM
Enables custom function to be called on log print. Pointer to custom function
needs to be set with \fBel_option\fR(3)

.P
Many of the outputs can be configured for special needs, and some of them need
mandatory configuration. For information about output configuration see
\fBel_option\fR(3)


\fBel_output_disable\fR simply disables specified \fIoutput\fR. If no output
is enabled, logging will be disabled (no cpu cycles will be wasted constructing
message).

\fBel_ooutput_enable\fR and \fBel_ooutput_disable\fR work same way but also
accept \fIoptions\fR

.SH RETURN VALUE
0 is returned on success and -1 on errors

.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EINVAL
Specified \fIoutput\fR is invalid

.TP
.B EINVAL
\fIoptions\fR object is invalid (null)

.TP
.B ENOSYS
Specified \fIoutput\fR is not implemented on current system (support was not
compiled into library)

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR el_overview (7),
.BR el_init (3),
.BR el_cleanup (3),
.BR el_level_set (3),
.BR el_option (3),
.BR el_puts (3),
.BR el_print (3),
.BR el_vprint (3),
.BR el_perror (3),
.BR el_pmemory (3),
.BR el_oinit (3),
.BR el_ocleanup (3),
.BR el_olevel_set (3),
.BR el_ooption (3),
.BR el_oputs (3),
.BR el_oprint (3),
.BR el_ovprint (3),
.BR el_operror (3),
.BR el_opmemory (3),
